We're talking about preservation.
You said preserving is important, but you had a caveat there.
Yeah, because I was talking to a restorator who came to see me at a fair.
And he said, well, yes, he is doing that restoration work.
And I said, well, what are you restoring now?
And he said, well, I just sort of frog.
Yeah.
I just finished restoring a 19th century journal which is a very cheap journal and you can buy these in ancient bookshops for 400 or 500 D mark two or three volumes and here we stored one volume over a span of two months and it cost
the library or the one who paid for the restoration, nearly 10,000 demar.
I mean, here you see what makes sense in restoring and what not.
And I really would say one should be very careful in these things, because lots of books from the 19th and from the 20th century
they still exist in huge quantities and let's let it be said some of them don't even deserve to be preserved well of course i'm a bit i'm a bit highbrow on that but nevertheless one should really concentrate on the books that really deserve and need restoration there's a fire yeah there's a fire they
There's a small farm there and they seem to burn things.
It's a pity that you don't see the landscape here because it's very nice.
I saw it driving up though and your assistant told me it was quite wonderful.
So how did you find this place?
How did you come here?
Well, this is a nice story, you know.
The man from which I eventually bought that huge library in 1991, 1992 with botanical and zoological and natural history books and atlases.
He was a customer of mine for many years.
He even was the first man
to respond to my first catalogue you know, I sent this catalogue out and did not know anything about customers because it was the first catalogue and I had never sold any books and I got the addresses and the names of the customers from various sources so I sent I think 600 or 700 copies out or a thousand maybe and the first man to call me
was that very customer who was going to be well essential for my life because he was a very very big collector of not only books but preferably books and after having seen two or three of my catalogs after having bought some books from me he
told me he liked the way I was writing the catalogs, I was presenting the books, and he invited me to his house in Switzerland.
So this is a Swiss gentleman?
Well, he's a Swiss gentleman, but he had made his money in a company in Germany.
So he had lots of companies in Germany, in Switzerland, everywhere.
So most of his time he was in Augsburg.
and when I said well this is very nice but I really I did not think of seeing him because I thought it was only conventional that he invited me and then three times after we met for the first time no we did not meet but after he knew of us from our catalogs he
renewed his invitation and he said, well, you know, I just had my third heart attack and I mean this seriously.
Come and see me in the Wallis, in Sion, in Switzerland, and you can make a stay at my house near Schaffhausen, in which I do not
live any longer but which is quite nice and there are guardians there they will they will see you through okay so in 1980 in April 1980 I of course keep that date in my mind as you may as you may surmise Helga and I we drove to Sion
in the valleys, and we made a break here in the Biber Millet.
And when we entered here, I said to my wife, well, look at that.
I think this is, this should be our home.
And she said, well, now, now you're getting crazy.
Because we just had rebuilt a nice house in Bavaria and had bought an old schoolhouse for our business and so on.
And I had just reconstructed that schoolhouse, and... Well, we just began to be seriously settled there.
And then I said to Helga, let's try to get here.
And she said, no, this is impossible, and you're really dreaming, and I think you...
If you don't give up that, you get silly.
But I kept that in mind.
And indeed, this man wanted someone to preserve this estate, the house and the collections.
the art collection, the antiquities collection.
He wanted to pass it on, was it?
He wanted, yeah.
I mean, to pass it on to somebody who would respect it and take care of it, I guess.
Yes, yes.
He wanted someone to follow him.
In 1980, he was already 74 or so.
So he made his plans to settle everything.
and so we kept in, we kept contact with each other and in 1983 he invited me to buy half of the Vibermühle by giving him one half of my Bavarian company which then sounded quite well to me but I gave him one half of my
Bavarian company and then I realized that the Swiss were not at all willing to even let me buy or have one square meter of those 80,000 square meters of that estate let alone the house and so on they just laughed at us when we came and told them we wanted to have 50% but then
and I think you will see Adrian Flüemann so he was instrumental in that whole deal because he was also a customer of mine and he was Swiss so I begged I asked Flüemann to step in on my behalf and he then bought the whole of the Bibermühle from
the man from my customer, Mr. Bösch, and immediately I hired from him one half of the Bibermühle and we started our business there, but so to say not in a house that belonged to me.
So I stayed in Bavaria and only came to the Bibermühle once in two months or so, or once in three months.
But nevertheless, business was good.
Business evolved and I got pretty much known in those fields.
And then I discovered medieval manuscripts and
made a name in that field.
I published those catalogues, Leuchtenes Mittelalter catalogues, the like of which has never been published before.
And then Mr. Flumann got pretty, pretty difficult problems with his paternal
Heritage, a company near Zurich.
And he had to sell this and he had also to sell the Bibermüll.
And he said to me, and of course, I mean, he was right then, you will never be able to buy the Bibermüll.
But half a year before that,
I just had acquired the whole inventory, you know, of works of art and antiquities and also the library.
And I said, but what should I do with these?
If you sell this, I have to remove it, but I have no house, nothing where to install all these pieces.
And so I made up my mind and I tried once again to get the
permission by the canton authorities to buy the house.
Would it have helped if he would start Swiss citizenship?
Of course, I mean, this was the leaping point, so to say.
I mean, he could acquire everything being a Swiss.
But I mean, couldn't you ever become a Swiss?
No, this is very difficult.
You know, it takes 10 years or so.
It takes 10 years.
And I did not want to do that because I'm German and I want to stay German.
about my children, this is another quite different affair.
They may become Swiss, but I am not.
So I invited all the authorities from the Gemeinde Ramsen, from the Kantons Schaffhausen and from Bern and I made a small exhibition and I held a speech which way I could think to use to really
used the Bibermühle in a in a senseful way and so on and so on and believe it or not all of them and all the the ones that really were the ones in charge came to me after after my speech and after my after our conversation and the Bibermühle and said well
We will do everything that you can acquire this, notwithstanding our legal conditions.
Notwithstanding.
And they said, if this is the last thing we do in our official career, but we will see that you
that you can buy the house and the estate and of course I was and they said well you are world famous we want that your cultural shine falls on the canton shop this this was uttered this way I do not I do not
When I see your ads in the Book Collector, you still do cite both Germany and here.
Yes, yes.
And this is, I still run both of the companies, but of course, you know, as I'm in Bavaria only for three or four days a month,
can't really do business there.
I mean, do you do business there?
Well, in a certain way, but now, of course, 80% or 85% are done via Switzerland.
Now, when somebody expresses an interest in some of these extraordinary books and manuscripts that you just showed me a little while ago, and these are kinds of people that you've been dealing with, nevertheless,
You're talking about really a very serious acquisition.
Yes.
Do they come and look at them?
Or do they buy on the strength of the catalog entry?
Well, this depends, Mr. Bassbaines.
It depends.
People who know me, they know that they can trust on everything I write about these books and that they can buy this blind, so to say.
But of course, most of them
just like the occasion, you know, they just like the way of coming to the Bibermühle, getting laid out before them, the books, talking about these things, getting convinced by me, and so on.
Really, they like it, and of course we are talking of serious sums sometimes, six-figure, seven-figure sums,
Seven-figure cents?
Of course, of course.
I mean, I have lots of books that are worth more than a million Swiss francs or a million dollars.
And then, of course, I mean, the relation between a dealer and a good customer, a really good customer, must also be a sort of friendship, you know, because everyone must...
be able to trust the other, also blindly.
You have to trust the other.
The customer must be able to rely on whatever I'm saying about these things.
He must rely on what I'm proving.
And I must rely on what they say.
Some of them say, well, I take it.
Can I take it with me?
And I say, of course.
And he says,
Or she says, because lots of women are interested in it.
He says, can I pay you in three months or so?
Or in six months, if really important sums are involved.
And I say, sure, take it with you.
So we, both parties, have to rely on the other.
And I have, in the 20 years that I'm doing this business now, never been
uh disappointed and you said earlier that you have perhaps you know this this is a business that that serves perhaps 10 20 or 30 customers that's about it well the the most important customers they are never uh more than 20 or 30 the most important of course they are customers and we're talking about the world now so yes in the world
Of course, there are customers who buy one or two books a year from me, and I do not count them in these 20 or 30 customers.
But if he's one or two, buy seven-figure books... Well, then, of course, they belong to that guy.
But really, I mean, if you are in the business like I am, at the very top, you know, at the one-permille top, so to say, not percent, but per-mille top...
you don't have more customers than 20 or 30.
And this is enough.
And it's nice, too.
Of course.
You know every one of them.
There's security in this.
Because you don't have to... Do you acquire things with any of these customers in mind?
This is perfect for so-and-so.
Practically never.
You know?
Because I was always so convinced that I...
would choose the right things the right books and that then the right customer would would come with you know he would be attracted without even knowing of it but he would be attracted that I practically never buy books for certain customers and I'm quite I'm quite aware of
that I'm perhaps the only one who does it like that.
So I never have commissions in public auctions, you know.
Well, I'm sorry.
Whereas most of my fellows in the book trade, they live of commissions.
They live on commissions.
I've told you a cute story.
In my Gentle Madness book, I did an interview with Bill Scheide.
Yeah.
Of course, when he bought the 36-line Bible, he was shocked that he expected to be the underbidder to you.
And you know why I did not buy it?
I've heard stories, and I'm just wondering what the story is there.
I didn't like the book, I have to say.
It's only two-thirds of the 36-line Bible, and one-third of these two-thirds was so heavily...
re-imagined.
It was not a fine book.
I'm really sorry, but it was not a fine book.
But an important book.
A hugely, immensely important book, but this is perhaps one of my faults, you know, if it is not appealing to me.
It is very, very rare that I buy even the most immensely important book in the world.
If it doesn't appeal to me, it must have a certain appealing quality.
A texture, a resonance.
Yeah, yeah.
It has to speak to you almost.
It must also be visibly appealing to me.
So, and this was not, I mean, this was...
I knew, of course, that I would never be able to buy a 36-line Bible in my life.
But really, I mean, I'm still searching for a Gutenberg Bible.
So this is even more important than a 36-line Bible.
And I'm quite confident that sometime I will...
I will be able to get one.
Well, there are only two privately owned... I know, I know.
I know very well.
And really there's only one, I mean, because the shitey one is not going to... Yeah, shitey is to Princeton now, of course.
They say we don't know, but they know.
Of course, of course.
It's going to Princeton.
And in a certain way it's a pity, but in the other way it's quite...
Well, they make it impossible for you to inherit things.
Yes, yes.
Imagine with that library, the inheritance tax in that library, it would be impossible.
Yeah, of course.
So, of course, his hares would be forced to sell the library, which I would not regret, of course.
So we are here.
So this is the...
Schloss Herblingen Chateau, the old... Well, I'll show you.
Just a little reflection here.
Did you ever think, when you started in the business of being a bookseller, did you ever believe that you would achieve this level of...
Yes, I always wanted that, yes.
I have to say, I always thought that I could get there.
And I think you have to be very, what we call, ehrgeizig.
The English word will come to me, but what we call ehrgeizig, it is E-H-R-G-E-I-Z-I-G, ehrgeizig, etc.
but it will come to me so you have to be that to run all those risks and to take all these well difficulties and so I always want to get at the top whatever you did whatever yes of course one has to have this
this drive in your brain in your blood and the confidence and so perhaps I was the only man on earth to whom it didn't come as a surprise that we in the end succeeded in a certain way family and of course my dear fellow colleagues they
They were bad-mouthing, as the Americans say.
There's usually a reason for that.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, you know, if nobody likes to follow behind.
Of course not.
You're always going to find him.
But I... A lot of people hate Pierre.
I worked hard.
Yeah, of course.
He's a good friend of mine.
I interviewed him in Paris.
He's a good friend of mine, and I like him very much.
He's a grand old man.
He'll be in this transaction.
I'm going to see Niko Israel and Carlo Chiesa.
Oh, yeah.
Well, these three, I mean, they... So this is...
I'm shooting for the very best.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And everyone brings a different perspective.
Yeah, of course, of course.
And you're the young guy.
Nico Israel, unfortunately, stopped selling and dealing, but, I mean, he's the elder statesman.
Of course.
He can talk about the war, too, which is very interesting.
And that spanned the 50s, 60s, 70s, 80s, you know, in which he was one of the driving forces.
especially what concerns geography, accesses, travel and so on.
And Chiesa, he was for 30 or 40 years the leading, or he is, but he used to be the leading Italian bookseller.
But he's now stopping and his son takes over.
He said if he's well, he'll be happy.
Yeah, of course.
And Israel said the same thing.
He just got out of a hospital.
Tell them my regards.
I told them both that you were among the people and they were very pleased.
Well, I'd like to hear that.
Well, now, I mean, all those...
envies and so I mean they they have stopped because they knew that they could not stop me but of course there was a lot of there was a lot of envy a lot of rancune and so I mean really you wouldn't believe your ears sometimes some people recommended that I should write my autobiography now the first or two or three parts
and the next in 20 or in 30 years.
And really, I mean, if I start writing now, it will be two or three worlds like that.
But fortunately enough, I have a lot to do.
Catalogues, selling, and reconstructing our building there.
This will give about 1,200 square meters
space storage rooms, large exhibition rooms, bureaus and so on.
At what point did you realize that you had crossed the threshold?
Well, I mean, one was the reaction from my colleagues.
Thank you.
And the other was that more and more the whole book trade did not believe his eyes and his ears, and I did the very things.
They did not believe what they heard about me, but I did it.
So it was... Can you give me a couple of examples?
What would they hear that they wouldn't believe?
Well, for instance, they did not think that it could be true that I bought the most important Belgian collection of manuscripts, you know, because it was destined to Christie's.
Christie's was there.
And I came afterwards and I just snatched it away from them.
Forty important manuscripts...
So what did you make, a pre-emptive offer kind of a thing?
I just made it, made an offer.
And it was 15 or 20% more than what Christus had offered.
So of course I got it.
And the same year, I snatched away from Sotheby's the collection of the British Royal pension funds that J. Paul Getty, the medieval manuscript of the J. Paul Getty,
had bought from the British Rail pension funds.
And he had promised Sotheby's that they got the manuscripts that he did not keep.
And he kept only 10 manuscripts from the 32.
And I got 22 manuscripts from the British Rail.
I mean, one of the finest collections assembled in the 70s and in the 80s.
So Sotheby's and Christie, they really went furious.
They raged.
Thank you.
This is Alsatia.
After those days you deserve it.
To get only the best.
And, you know,
and one development gives the next, so to say.
I then was prepared to make the finest, the best and also the most luxurious catalogues that exist.
I can prove that.
Why is that important?
This is very important because I think that you can't
that you can't ask say a million dollars for a very fine book from a person without proving that this very book is worth a million dollars or so and to prove this it is vital to convince this very person say
in every aspect.
So, description, scholarly description, collation, whatever.
And so, my manuscript descriptions, they sometimes extend to 200 pages, folio-sized.
There you have that Boccaccio manuscript that is described on 260 pages.
with 88 full-page color illustrations.
And so you give the people to whom you sell these treasures, one has to say, a feeling of confidence.
that everything is alright.
And you're also making a record of that manuscript.
Of course.
And this is the only record of me that I have because I'm not writing the books that I wanted to write but I write those catalogs.
But I mean beyond that manuscripts by definition are unique.
And if they're going into private hands you are giving the world at large a record.
Yes.
And all the libraries especially in the United States
They are really very keen on it.
And by the catalogs, I'm sure, and the catalogs.
As reference to it.
As reference to it, yes.
And especially that series, Leuchtenes Mittelalter, with the six volumes, they contain nearly 300 medieval manuscripts, of which 910 were never known before.
So also the scholarly world never known before.
I mean, they came from private sources, or they were only known by one photograph, black and white photograph, in a Sotheby's catalog in the 40s or so.
So they got known only through my descriptions, or through the descriptions of Eberhard Koenig and I, and through the color photographs that we gave.
And so I made sure that I got the best
authority on these things, because these catalogues are not only sort of magazine of medieval manuscripts or very fine books, but they are also places of scholarly research.
Some of my manuscript catalogues, they contain discoveries
of new, of the names of book illuminators, of whole new schools and so on.
And this is taken over by the scholarly world.
And you hire, you retain the services of experts.
Only one expert.
This is Eberhard Koenig.
So you actually write most of these catalogs yourself too?
Yes, of course.
Of course.
And I do this not only very willingly, but I...
enthusiastically you know and though I'm a very lazy man yeah well I'm a very lazy man but writing these things I just wrote this catalogue on 50 unique printed books which will have 200 folio pages of text and 250 pages of colour for the gospel I wrote it in three weeks amazing so if I have to do
than something.
I do it very quickly.
And of course very seriously and also thoroughly because I really can't afford being trapped on an error.
I mean everyone is subject to faults or errors.
But, you know, in my own field, I really try to avoid any error.
I really try.
And I may say that in my catalogs, 95% are really the truth.
And 5% are perhaps subject to errors or so.
But this is normal.
Subject to challenge, perhaps.
And if I had two years' time instead of
two months or so for preparing and publishing a catalogue like that.
Of course I would try to even avoid those five percent, but being forced, being under the pressure of publishing these catalogues very speedily, it is inevitable to
You know, I do not verify every bibliographical quotation that I take from, say, a source that is very reliable.
Not every.
But most of the time I even verify these.
And you would not believe how often they themselves commit errors.
Oh, I would believe that because I know...
When I was doing my book, I mean, you learn after a while who to trust and who not to trust.
Yeah, of course.
Of course.
I mean, printed sources.
Yeah.
And then, like, Eddie Wolfe.
Not Eddie Wolfe.
Yeah, Wolfe on Rosenbach.
Well, Wolfe made a few mistakes.
Of course he made mistakes.
He made some exaggerations there that went so far.
Yeah.
And then that other fellow, the older one, Eddie Newton, was terrible.
Newton, yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
Now, Newton, he was just, I mean, he pretended to be a poet writing on bibliomania and bibliophilae, but he did not pretend to be a scholar.
No, no.
This, of course, not.
One of the most crucial points, I think.
Yeah.
And booksellers, not only auction houses, but booksellers.
Think of what the United States would be without Rosenbach in the first 20 or 30 years of this century, or without George D. Smith in the first 20 years, without Krauss and so many others.
What would the Italian book market
have been without Leo Olschke, without Tamarote Marinias, without Giuseppe Martini.
By the way, do you read German?
Because I wrote an essay on Ulrico Hoepley and his auction house in Italy, you know, in the first half of this century.
My daughter.
Well, I send you this.
She does my job.
Exactly.
So it really deserves to be pointed out.
When you hear the phrase book culture, what does that say to you?
What do you think of?
Well, I mean, to me, it means much more than literary culture, because it really involves the whole cosmos of the book.
And...
as I had to learn after leaving the university, that knowing literature very well, the literatures very well, you know, I mean, I really knew from Sanskrit to modern Portuguese, I knew most of the languages and most of the literatures, 3,000 years of the literatures, but I did not really very well know the books, so I had to learn three or four or five years, and I'm still learning, of course,
But the basics I had to learn in the first two or three years, and I made a huge number of mistakes, of course.
And then to be able to marry, so to say, these two spheres, the book sphere and the sphere of the literatures,
This is of course a very fortunate thing and not many succeed in this.
But the book culture for me is one of the richest and one of the finest spheres imaginable.
We haven't even discussed the future of the book.
I think it's much more because most of the libraries, they just have that duty to make public the most recent literature to those who are interested in it.
But what I understand under book culture, this is a room or a space of, say, 2,000 years.
It is a room of 2000 years and it is built by rolls and by codices and by printed books and by the most ephemeral things.
So these 2000 years say from the beginning of the Christian era this is what our book culture is made of and will be made of for many hundred years to come.
because these are the two millenniums of the books.
After the year 2000, there will be the computer perhaps.
There will ever be books, of course.
So it is our duty, I think, it is our duty to preserve these 2000 years in our brains, in our libraries, in our
So how many languages would you say you were able to work with?
Well, to work with, it's about 18 or 18 years.
I know old Greek, of course.
Of course Latin.
English a little bit.
No, excellent, thank you.
French.
Italian, Spanish, Portuguese and then all the old languages you know so as I told you I studied Old Provençal, Old French, Old Catalan but Old Islandic because I did also Germanic, German languages so it will be about 15 to 20 languages that I can read
And about five to seven where I can speak.
But I think one has to do that, you know.
Only by manuscript that I can read.
So it's really a shame that I can't read those fine shahnamas of the Persian or of the Indian scribes.
Sometimes I buy them without being able to read them because they are, I have so fine miniatures or Koran.
But normally I only buy manuscripts or books that I can read.
So describing them then is...
You're not just selling.
No, no, no, no, no.
You're a beautiful artifact.
Selling is only, say... And you've never really used that word this whole time I've been here.
No, no, no, no, no.
To your great credit, I have.
I'm the only person who's used that word.
Well, to sell a book is in a certain way necessary.
It's not essential to me, but it's necessary to go on.
But to sell the book is only 1% of the works that I do around the book.
I get offered a book.
I see it, I feel it, I browse through it.
I smell it.
I smell it, yes.
I get in touch with it.
And then I buy it, or I don't buy it.
But most of the times I buy it.
It's really a fine book.
And if it is a very fine book, I always buy it.
And policy, that's interesting.
Yeah.
One really has to make his choice before buying.
You don't buy everything, right?
No, no, not at all.
I mean, I used to buy everything in my first years.
And of course, I have 80% of what I bought then still on my shelf.
But now I'm, of course...
very very concerned about preservation state preservation provenance and all these things we have already talked about it and so if it is very fine I always buy it even if I do not know everything about this book and as there are millions and millions of books of course you can't know everything about every book but
This is what my reference library is kept for and in these 25,000 books and 100,000 catalogs you find anything you ever wanted to know and a lot of what you never wanted to know too.
So then I get in touch with the book once again either immediately or preparing a description for a catalog
or for someone who could be interested in this.
And then a second phase begins, a second step to be taken.
And this is the most important one, to really get in touch.
Yes, cheers.
This is one of the finest Burgundy wines in the world.
This is Claude de la Roche on Dijac.
So, I'm an addicted to Burgundy wines.
Thank you.
So, this is the parlay, please.
Sweet.
So this is the most important step, because then you really get in connection with the object.
And this is sort of a love affair, really.
Pia Berenz said almost exactly the same thing.
He used a very crude
Anglo-Saxon women.
And I said, and I said, and my wife was there.
And I said, maybe you want, and I have a tape recorder, and I said, maybe you want to say, make love.
And I said, no, I want to say, what do you mean?
Four letters.
That's what he was saying.
Well, he may say that, you know, being 84 years old, he may say that.
And having two-year-old children.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I doubt if I'll use that.
My point is I think he was expressing the very same sentence.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, of course.
No, no, no, I mean... This is a physical, emotional... Yes, yes.
It is really... It's very emotional.
You have to fall in love with it before and then you have to develop this falling in love into love.
And I totally agree.
And then, of course, you have to convince...
other people that this is worth your love and their love.
And I succeeded.
And I don't mean to be cool, but do you have to be a salesman too?
Yeah, of course.
And I am.
I think I am.
Because otherwise I wouldn't be here.
We wouldn't be together.
Because otherwise I would still be in my Rottelmünster selling books for 200 Mark and...
being happy to have a turnover of 200,000 DMG a year and in 1992 I made a turnover of nearly 30 million as a one person company which is unheard of in this business of course I think I made the three or four most important deals in the history of book selling I made deals selling to one man
books for the value of 18.5 million Deutsche Mark, which was then 13 million dollars.
at one point, at one time.
To one person?
Yeah, to one person.
Is this somebody you can tell me who he is?
No, no, no, I'm not allowed to do that.
I haven't asked that at all.
Of course, I mean, if it would have been Paul Mellon or so, I would have told you.
Or if the person was deceased, there would be another story.
Yeah.
Okay.
Oh, well, this is good for barley.
I love barley.
Yeah, so do I.
The same meaning.
The sentiment was precisely the same.
What he said is, he said, and he even followed the same thing.
He said, by the time I take my second promenade, his promenade with the book.
He takes a promenade with the book.
And then I do this, I do that.
And then, of course, at his age, like yourself, this is why I'm asking you, he basically writes all of his own catalogs.
And I said to him, and I'll ask you the same question.
I think you may have answered it in various ways, but maybe you can crystallize it.
What's the most satisfying aspect of your business?
This one, of course.
This one.
To be able to transfer your, say...
still unshaped, falling in love with a book into a definable love and then convince someone else to share this love.
I'm sorry, I mean, my English is perhaps 15% of what my German is.
And in German, I could tell it convincingly.
By the way, I'll even say this with a tape recorder.
I'm happy.
My practice is to go over quotes that I use with people.
I'm very happy to share with you the quotations that you give me that I use.
I mean, if you correct them, say, as the English language is concerned.
What I'm saying is I'd be happy to read the things that you say and show you what you...
said, and even give you the opportunity to change things.
Because I want it right.
Being right for me is... I think this is very important.
I think it's very important.
It's no mistake that people are holding vectors on this point.
This world of our books and our world, that this is shown to the many thousands and millions who
would perhaps be interested in these things, but they have never the opportunity to know more about it than say by reading two or three insipid lines of someone who does not know anything about books at all.
And this is really what concerns me most about these things, that most of the journalists
do not know anything, even less than nothing about books, and especially about fine books, about rare books.
And so I'm still agreeing to those journalists as the one that I showed you today who want to write about me.
Well, they're dazzled by the numbers.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Of course, of course.
Now, I'm delighted that you offered me a number.
I hadn't asked you a number yet, but you told me.
I didn't make any 92.
Yeah, yeah.
But, you know, we hear numbers.
They hear numbers, and that's what impresses them.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And it is very impressive.
Yes, but... Because those numbers are in the... When people talk about Kentrick, they say his numbers are art numbers.
and you said that art gallery numbers these are the numbers you expect from someone who's dealing in the fine arts of course no longer only books but books is what really made me and what I'm still in love with it's books but books seen or looked at
as also works of art.
And I think it is very well possible to combine those two worlds, you know, the world of books and the world of the old book as a work of art.
Have you been tempted to go into the fine arts at all?
Never, no, never.
And I tell you why.
Because most of the works of art are only parts of what they used to be at the beginning, you know.
Because I'm always fascinated by the Middle Ages, the Renaissance, and my interest is then a little bit dwindling towards the 20th century.
I know that
compared with illuminated manuscripts.
99.9% of all the paintings of the 14th and 15th and 16th century that are still on the market have been restored to a point that one can say that only 20% are original and 80% are over paintings, restorations,
retouches and so on and so on.
So what we see today in most of the works of art of the Middle Ages and of the Renaissance is not what they were but what centuries of restorers and fakers and other honorary people have made of them.
So the only authentic work of art from the Middle Ages that you can still acquire are illuminated manuscripts because they have always been closed, only opened for
smallest fraction of their time of their existence and so all those miniatures made in the 12th and the 13th and the 14th and the 15th century they opened before us as they opened before the very first processor and this is what really fascinates me and the same with books and
One of the most important things about books is, of course, that collecting and also dealing with books is perhaps the only profession in which you can discover a sort of three-dimensional reward.
Three-dimensional.
You can read a book because of its text.
This is one dimension and it's very important.
For a long time it was the only dimension.
Then you can read a book because of its aesthetic qualities.
This is the second dimension.
Imagine an old master drawing or an old master etching yourself.
You have only the aesthetic qualities.
You don't get
philosophical insights, connaissance from an old master etching.
And then you have the third dimension which is combined of its preservation, of its provenance,
and of its, so to say, art-transcending qualities.
And this is the old book, the fine and rare old book, and dealing with it is the only three-dimensional, what we call erkenntnis.
What's that word?
Erkenntnis.
How do you say that?
that you can find in the art world, because there is still the sort of philosophical insight that no other collecting activity can provide.
and it's getting better all the time.
The bouquet is just marvellous.
And so, this is the reason for most of the really great bookmen to die in their bookmen's shoes.
Really!
I mean Krauss, in the last two or three years,
He was just a shadow of himself, of course.
But in his very last year, he still was in the Beaver Mule and bought books from me.
But they carried him in because he was no longer able to take these three or four steps.
They carried him in, he bought books from me, he was delighted and it kept him alive.
It was really like that.
And this is perhaps the most rewarding of all aspects of our business, that we look forward to ages and ages and ages, our 60s, our 70s, our 80s, doing still business, loving the books, selling books to sell, but most important, buying books.
So we are, in a certain way, we are all concealed collectors, of course.
But in my case, I have to say that I'm very different to my French colleagues.
The French, they are collectors and they keep most of the best books for themselves.
and sell only the second range of objects to their clients, but the clients are not dumb, they are not silly, they know exactly what they want to.
And my decision from the first and second of my life as a bookseller was to sell, to make everything sellable that I have, except for some
collector for some author collections that I cherish.
It's Horace, Horace and Rabelais and some German.
I also collect some French and English writers.
I collect William Faulkner and Thomas Pynchon.
No kidding.
Not at all.
And I have the finest collection of Vladino Nabokov in Europe.
So, I mean, these are the three American writers, I say American though, of course, Nabokov is... Well, Nabokov is basically, he's considered American.
But his finest things you wrote in English, I mean, Lolita and Ada and whatever.
So, I like these three.
Have you seen Finchens' new book?
I have it.
I'm a bit disappointed but of course it requires so many historical knowledge.
It's a very bold book.
But it's better than the last.
Vinland was an embarrassment.
But of course
Rainbow.
Gravity's Rainbow.
This is, of course, a great 20th century novel.
Great, great.
One of the 10 greatest novels that I know.
Three, perhaps, of Gorkner.
I have a very modest collection of them.
I mean, for what I...